>> Stewart: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SUNDAY, FEBRUARY 21:
WHAT'S NEXT ON THE LONG ROAD
AHEAD FOR THE PRESIDENTIAL
CANDIDATES?
THE REVEALING LETTERS OF POPE
JOHN PAUL II.
>> SHE REFERRED TO THE
CORRESPONDENCE AS A KIND OF WAY
OF BUTTRESSING HER CLAIM TO
BEING SO IMPORTANT IN HIS LIFE.
>> AND USING DRONES TO
PREDICT TORNADOES.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
ALISON STEWART.
>> Stewart: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
THE 2016 RACE FOR THE WHITE
HOUSE IS ENTERING A NEW, FASTER-
PACED PHASE, WITH ROUGHLY 90% OF
THE DELEGATES IN THE NOMINATING
PROCESS STILL UP FOR GRABS.
AFTER WINNING YESTERDAY'S FIRST-
IN-THE-SOUTH PRIMARY IN SOUTH
CAROLINA AND SWEEPING ALL 50
REPUBLICAN CONVENTION DELEGATES,
BUSINESSMAN DONALD TRUMP IS IN
THE LEAD.
TRUMP AND HIS RIVALS ARE NOW
FOCUSING ON THE DOZEN STATES
HOLDING PRIMARIES AND CAUCUSES
ON MARCH 1, KNOWN AS "SUPER
TUESDAY," WHEN A QUARTER OF THE
NOMINATING DELEGATES ARE AT
STAKE.
NEXT SATURDAY, IT WILL BE THE
THE DEMOCRATS' TURN IN SOUTH
CAROLINA, WHERE HILLARY CLINTON
AND BERNIE SANDERS WILL COMPETE
IN A PRIMARY.
FRESH OFF HER VICTORY IN THE
NEVADA CAUCUSES YESTERDAY,
CLINTON SAYS SHE IS LOOKING
AHEAD TO THE STATES THAT HAVE
YET TO VOTE.
>> I'M ON MY WAY TO TEXAS, BILL
IS ON HIS WAY TO COLORADO.
THE FIGHT GOES ON, THE FUTURE
THAT WE WANT IS WITHIN OUR
GRASP.
THANK YOU ALL, GOD BLESS YOU!
>> Stewart: THE FORMER SENATOR
AND SECRETARY OF STATE HAD A
DECISIVE WIN ON THE FIRST IN THE
WEST CONTEST.
SHE BEAT VERMONT SENATOR BERNIE
SANDERS BY MORE THAN 5% OF THE
VOTE AND WALKED AWAY WITH AT
LEAST 19 OF THE 35 DELEGATES AT
STAKE IN THE NEVADA CAUCUSES.
SANDERS RECEIVED 15.
RIGHT AFTER HER NEVADA WIN,
CLINTON HEADED TO TEXAS-- THE
BIGGEST PRIZE FOR BOTH POLITICAL
PARTIES ON MARCH 1.
>> IT'S BEEN EIGHT MONTHS SINCE
I WAS HERE, AND THE STAKES ARE
EVEN HIGHER THAN THEY WERE THEN.
NOW THE SUPREME COURT HANGS IN
THE BALANCE!
>> Stewart: CLINTON HOPES HER
PROVEN SUPPORT WITH BLACK VOTERS
TRANSLATES INTO VICTORY IN SOUTH
CAROLINA.
SO FAR HER WEAKNESS IN THE FIRST
CONTESTS HAS BEEN WITH LOWER
INCOME VOTERS AND VOTERS UNDER
45 YEARS OLD.
TODAY, SANDERS SAID VOTER
TURNOUT IN NEVADA WAS NOT AS
LARGE AS HE HAD HOPED.
>> BY THE WAY, WE DID
PHENOMENALLY WELL WITH YOUNG
PEOPLE.
I THINK WE DID WELL WITH WORKING
CLASS PEOPLE.
WE WERE TAKING ON A CANDIDATE
WHO RAN IN 2008.
>> Stewart: REPUBLICAN
FRONTRUNNER DONALD TRUMP SAYS HE
HAS HIGH HOPES TO WIN THE SEVEN
SOUTHERN STATES VOTING ON SUPER
TUESDAY.
>> I WENT TO MOBILE, ALABAMA--
35,000 PEOPLE.
WE WENT TO OKLAHOMA RECENTLY--
TWICE, 20,000 PEOPLE, 20,000
PEOPLE.
NO MATTER WHERE WE GO, WE FILL
UP THE ARENAS.
>> Stewart: IN THE FINAL TALLY
IN SOUTH CAROLINA, TRUMP WON
32.5% OF THE VOTE, 10 POINTS
AHEAD OF FLORIDA SENATOR MARCO
RUBIO, WHO EDGED TEXAS SENATOR
TED CRUZ FOR SECOND PLACE.
WITH A DISTANT FOURTH PLACE
FINISH IN A PRIMARY ONCE WON BY
HIS FATHER AND BROTHER, FORMER
FLORIDA GOVERNOR JEB BUSH CALLED
IT QUITS.
>> THE PEOPLE OF IOWA AND NEW
HAMPSHIRE AND SOUTH CAROLINA
HAVE SPOKEN, AND I REALLY
RESPECT THEIR DECISION.
SO, TONIGHT I AM SUSPENDING MY
CAMPAIGN.
>> Stewart: FOR MORE ANALYSIS ON
THE PRESIDENTIAL RACE, NEWSHOUR
POLITICAL DIRECTOR LISA
DESJARDINS JOINS ME NOW FROM
COLUMBIA, SOUTH CAROLINA.
AND LISA, DONALD TRUMP IS
RUNNING A UNIQUE CAMPAIGN AND
IT SEEMS TO BE HIS STRENGTH.
HOW DID THAT PLAY OUT YESTERDAY?
>> ABSOLUTELY.
WE SAW HIM WIN BY DOUBLE DIGITS
IN SOUTH CAROLINA.
THAT'S NOT EASY TO DO AFTER SUCH
A BIG WIN IN NEW HAMPSHIRE.
THERE'S TWO DIFFERENT TYPES OF
VOTERS THERE.
BUT WE SAW WHAT HE DID, AND HE
DID VERY WELL WITH ALMOST ALL
INCOME GROUPS BUT NOT EVERYONE.
I THINK WHEN WE LOOK AT THE
LONG-TERM MOMENTUM FOR TRUMP,
THAT IS THE REAL QUESTION NOW,
RIGHT?
IS THIS THE MAN THAT IS GOING TO
BE THE REPUBLICAN NOMINEE AM
SOMETHING I NOTICED IN THE EXIT
POLLS YESTERDAY WAS LOYALTY
AMONG TRUMP VOTERS.
WHEN YOU ASKED VOTERS YESTERDAY
IF THEY WERE SATISFIED WITH ONLY
THEIR CANDIDATE OR COULD TAKE
OTHER CANDIDATES AS AN
ACCEPTABLE NOMINEE, 30% SAID
THEY WOULD ONLY ACCEPT THEIR
CANDIDATE.
OF THOSE REPUBLICANS, THE
LARGEST NUMBER, 49%, WERE TRUMP
VOTERS.
>> IT WAS DEFINITELY A BIG WIN
FOR MR. TRUMP LAST NIGHT BUT
THERE WERE SIGNS OF SLOWING
MOMENTUM.
CAN YOU WALK US THROUGH WHAT
HAPPENED IN THE PAST MONTH?
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
IF YOU LOOK AT THE LAST FEW
DAYS, THOSE VOTERS WENT TO CRUZ
AND RUBIO.
YOU LOOK AT THE VERY LAST DAY,
THERE YOU SEE DONALD TRUMP DOING
A LITTLE BIT BETTER, 22% BUT
STILL NOT WINNING.
AND THAT'S A BIG CHANGE FROM NEW
HAMPSHIRE.
DONALD TRUMP WAS WINNING THOSE
LAST MINUTE DECIDERS BY AND
LARGE.
NOW IS THAT JUST A FACTOR,
SOMETHING THAT HAPPENED IN SOUTH
CAROLINA OR SOMETHING THAT HAS
CHANGED ABOUT HOW VOTERS IN
GENERAL LOOK AT DONALD TRUMP?
IT'S NOT CLEAR.
DONALD TRUMP AS YOU SAID, A
UNIQUE CAMPAIGN.
NO ONE WHO HAS WON BOTH NEW
HAMPSHIRE AND SOUTH CAROLINA IN
THE REPUBLICAN PARTY HAS LOST
THE NOMINATION BUT AGAIN NO ONE
HAS EVER BEEN A MULTIBILLIONAIRE
REALITY TV STAR BEFORE EITHER.
>> SENATOR MARCO RUBIO CAME IN
SECOND LAST NIGHT.
HOW IS HE GOING TO CAPITALIZE ON
THIS?
>> I THINK WE REALLY SAW SORT OF
A NEW ENERGIZED RUBIO LAST
NIGHT.
HE IS APPEALING ACROSS-THE-BOARD
TO AMERICANS OUTSIDE THE
REPUBLICAN PARTY AS WELL AS IN.
AND HE'S GOING BACK AND SAYING
I'M GOING TO TAKE A PREVIOUS
MANTEL OF THIS PARTY AND CARRY
IT FORWARD.
LISTEN ONE OF HIS KEY QUOTES.
>> NOW THOSE OF US WHO GREW UP
WHEN IT WAS MORNING IN AMERICA
AND RONALD REAGAN WAS IN THE
WHITE HOUSE ARE READY TO DO FOR
OUR GENERATION-- ARE READY TO DO
FOR THE NEXT GENERATION WHAT
RONALD REAGAN DID FOR OURS.
>> SO LISA T SOUNDS LIKE SENATOR
RUBIO IS THINKING ABOUT
EXPANDING THE BASE.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
HIS ADVISORS ARE ALMOST OBSESSED
WITH THAT CONCEPT.
THEY REALIZE THE REPUBLICAN
PARTY IN THE LONG-TERM IN
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS HAS A
PROBLEM.
AND THEY THINK THAT MARCO RUBIO
IS REALLY THE ONLY ONE WHO CAN
EXPAND THAT BASE, NOT JUST AMONG
YOUNG PEOPLE WHERE MARCO RUBIO
IS STARTING TO GAIN SOME
MOMENTUM BUT ESPECIALLY WHEN ARE
YOU TALKING ABOUT DIVERSITY.
YOU SAW ON STAGE HE HAD
AFRICAN-AMERICAN SENATOR TIM
SCOTT, INDIANA GOVERNOR NICKI
HALEY, SOMETHING RUBIO PAID
ATTENTION TO IN HIS SPEECH LAST
NIGHT.
I THINK TO SOME DEGREE HE SEEMED
TO HAVE BEEN MORE CHARGED UP
PERSONALLY THAN EVER BUT HE
STILL HAS TO DEAL WITH DONALD
TRUMP AND THERE IS A REAL
QUESTION OF WHEN DOES HE START
SWINGING IF HE DOES START
SWINGING AND HOW AT THE CURRENT
FRONTRUNNER.
>> TED CRUZ CAME IN THIRD PLACE.
AFTER HAVING COME IN SECOND
PLACE, IN NEW HAMPSHIRE AND
HAVING WON IN IOWA.
WHAT HAPPENED?
>> RIGHT, THAT'S NOT THE
DIRECTION THE CAMPAIGN USUALLY
WANTS TO GO IN.
BUT THE CRUZ CAMPAIGN IS SAYING
HEY, IT WAS VERY CLOSE.
AND IT WAS.
WITHIN A THOUSAND VOTES HERE IN
SOUTH CAROLINA.
THAT IS A CLOSE RACE AM I THINK
THE BIGGER PROBLEM FOR TED CRUZ
IS NOT THAT HE PLACED THIRD HERE
BUT MORE THAT HIS SUPPORT IS A
VERY SPECIFIC TYPE OF VOTER,
VERY CONSERVATIVE VOTERS,
EVANGELICALS THAT WILL PLAY WELL
IN A LOT OF THE SOUTHERN STATES
COMING UP ON SUPER TUESDAY BUT
PAST THAT, TED CRUZ MIGHT NEED
TO BROADEN HIS SUPPORT IN ORDER
TO WIN THE NOMINATION WHEN HE
HAS SOMEONE LIKE DONALD TRUMP ON
ONE SIDE AND MARCO RUBIO ON THE
OTHER.
>> LET'S TURN TO THE DEMOCRATS.
HILLARY CLINTON HAD A SOLID WIN
LAST NIGHT AFTER A REALLY TOUGH
BATTLE IN NEW HAMPSHIRE.
BUT THERE COULD BE SIGNS OF
WEAKNESS.
IT WAS A MIXED BAG WHEN IT CAME
TO MINORITY VOTERS.
CAN YOU EXPLAIN WHAT HAPPENED?
>> LOOK AT HOW AFRICAN-AMERICANS
VOTER OVERWHELMINGLY FOR HILLARY
CLINTON, 76%.
THAT'S GETTING INTO AN OBAMA
TYPE AFRICAN-AMERICAN SUPPORT
LEVEL.
NOW YOU LOOK AT THE OTHER RACES,
HILLARY CLINTON DID NOT WIN WITH
WHITE VOTERS.
BERNIE SANDERS EKED OUT A WIN
THERE AND SHE LOST BY MORE WITH
LATINO VOTERS.
SO IT REALLY WAS THAT
AFRICAN-AMERICAN LARGE MAJORITY
THAT CARRIED HER.
BUT THINK ABOUT A STATE LIKE
TEXAS WHERE THERE ARE MORE
LATINO VOTERS.
AND THINK ABOUT WHERE HILLARY
CLINTON IS GOING NEXT, IT'S
TEXAS.
>> WHAT IS BERNIE SANDERS NEXT
MOVE?
>> BERNIE SANDERS HAS TO THINK
STRATEGY NOW.
HE HAS HAD PHENOMENAL
FUNDRAISING BUT HE'S GOT TO
THINK CAREFULLY ABOUT WHERE HE
SPENDS THOSE DOLLARS AND WHERE
HE SPENDS HIS TIME.
HE'S GOT SOME GOOD PLACES FOR
HIM, MASSACHUSETTS, VERMONT,
HE'S GOT SOME HAPPY STATES
COMING UP IN THE SANDERS
MOMENTUM CATEGORY.
HE'S GOT OTHER PLACES THAT MIGHT
BE DIFFICULT LIKE THE SOUTH
AFTER SOUTH CAROLINA, ARKANSAS,
GEORGIA, THOSE KINDS OF PLACES
ARE WHERE HE NEEDS TO BUILD MORE
PERHAPS THAN HE HAS RIGHT NOW.
>> LISA DESJARDINS FROM
COLUMBIA, SOUTH CAROLINA, THANKS
SO MUCH.
>> MY PLEASURE.
>> Stewart: HOW COMPLEX IS THE
DELEGATE MATH ON THE ROAD TO
EACH PARTY'S NOMINATION?
FIND OUT AT pbs.org/newshour.
POPE FRANCIS SAID LAST WEEK
THAT ANY MAN WHO IS UNABLE TO
HAVE A GOOD FRIENDSHIP WITH A
WOMAN IS, "MISSING SOMETHING,"
AND THAT EVEN A POPE CAN HAVE A
"HEALTHY, HOLY FRIENDSHIP" WITH
A WOMAN.
THE PONTIFF WAS RESPONDING TO A
REPORTER'S QUESTION ABOUT A NEW
DOCUMENTARY DETAILING A THREE-
DECADE-LONG FRIENDSHIP BETWEEN
POPE JOHN PAUL II AND A POLISH-
AMERICAN WOMAN.
SHE WAS A PHILOSOPHER NAMED ANNA
TERESA TIMENYESKA WHO DIED IN
2014, NINE YEARS AFTER THE POPE
PASSED AWAY.
THEIR CORRESPONDENCE IS NOW THE
SUBJECT OF A NEW PROGRAM THAT
WILL BE BROADCAST ON MOST PBS
STATIONS ON APRIL 5.
HERE IS AN EXCERPT.
>> I'M EDWARD STOURTON, A
BRITISH JOURNALIST, AND I KNEW
FROM RESEARCHING MY BIOGRAPHY OF
JOHN PAUL II THAT ANNA TERESA
TYEMIENECKA HAD COLLABORATED
WITH KAROL WOJTYLA, AS HE WAS
KNOWN BEFORE HE BECAME POPE, ON
ONE OF HIS BOOKS, "THE ACTING
PERSON."
SHE DIED TWO YEARS AGO, AND SHE
MIGHT HAVE TAKEN THE FULL STORY
OF THEIR LONG RELATIONSHIP TO
THE GRAVE, BUT IN 2008, A NEW
YORK BASED EXPERT IN RARE
MANUSCRIPTS RECEIVED AN UNUSUAL
PHONE CALL.
>> I WAS ASKED TO GET ON A PLANE
AND GO TO NEW HAMPSHIRE TO LOOK
AT SOME LETTERS FROM POPE JOHN
PAUL II.
THE FIRST THING THAT COMES TO
MIND, IT'S GOT TO BE WRONG, IT'S
FAKE, IT CAN'T BE RIGHT.
THEN, ALL OF A SUDDEN YOU WALK
IN AND YOU SEE THE ITEMS AND
THERE'S NO DOUBT THAT THEY ARE
RIGHT.
>> MARSHA MALINOVSKI NEGOTIATED
A PRIVATE SALE AND THE LETTERS
WERE SENT TO JOHN PAUL'S NATIVE
POLAND.
I TRACKED THEM DOWN IN WARSAW,
THE POLISH CAPITAL AND
ESTABLISHED THEY WERE BOUGHT FOR
A SEVEN FIGURE SUM FOR THE
POLISH NATIONAL LIBRARY.
THEY'VE BEEN HERE EVER SINCE,
UNKNOWN TO THE PUBLIC.
BUT AFTER LONG NEGOTIATIONS THE
LIBRARY ALLOWED US TO SEE AND
INDEED FILM, KAROL WOJTYLA'S
LETTERS TO ANNA TERESA
TYEMIENECKA.
THE STORY THEY TELL BEGINS HERE,
AT THE ARCHBISHOP'S PALACE IN
KRAKOW.
"DEAR MADAM PROFESSOR, I
RECEIVED YOUR MESSAGE ON THE
TWELFTH OF JULY BUT BECAUSE I'VE
BEEN AWAY FROM KRAKOW, I AM ONLY
ANSWERING NOW.
I PROPOSE THAT WE MEET AND TALK
ON THE TWENTY NINTH OF JULY."
>> KAROL WOJTYLA'S GUEST HERE
THAT SUMMER EVENING WAS MARRIED,
IN HER MID-FIFTIES AND A
PROFESSIONAL PHILOSOPHER.
LIKE HIM, SHE HAD ATTENDED
KRAKOW'S FAMOUS JAGELLONIAN
UNIVERSITY, BEFORE STUDYING
ABROAD AND SETTLING IN THE
UNITED STATES.
AND SHE HAD GOT IN TOUCH WITH
THE CARDINAL BECAUSE SHE ADMIRED
A BOOK OF PHILOSOPHY THAT HE'D
WRITTEN.
IT'S A WONDERFUL PICTURE ISN'T
IT?
BILL AND JADVIGA SMITH, BOTH
ACADEMICS BASED IN NEW ENGLAND,
BECAME ANNA TERESA'S CLOSE
FRIENDS TOWARDS THE END OF HER
LIFE AND ARE THE EXECUTORS OF
HER WILL.
WHEN SHE DID WRITE TO CARDINAL
WOJTYLA, SHE WROTE THE BOOK AND
THEN WROTE TO HIM AND SAID, CAN
I MEET YOU?
IT'S JUST THE SORT OF
IMPULSIVENESS IN THE WAY SHE...
>> YES AND NO.
IT WASN'T NECESSARILY-- WELL
HERE, SHE STARTS BECAUSE SHE
SPOTTED THE BOOK AND IT WOULD BE
NICE TO WRITE TO THIS CARDINAL
OR BISHOP.
HERE, HERE IS THE BOOK, LET ME
JUST FIX IT IN ENGLISH.
>> YES, HE WAS INTERESTED IN
HAVING HIS IDEAS PROMULGATED IN
THE WEST.
>> BUT I'M STILL STRUCK, IT WAS
QUITE A THING TO GET ON A PLANE.
WAS THAT?
>> THAT WAS NOT UNUSUAL FOR HER.
NOT AT ALL.
TO GET ON A PLANE AND DO
SOMETHING LIKE THIS, THIS WAS
PART OF HER CHARACTER.
THAT'S THE WAY SHE TACKLED
EVERYTHING.
>> AT FIRST THE LETTERS FOCUSED
ON PHILOSOPHY.
THEY TRADED IDEAS IN THE WAY YOU
MIGHT EXPECT FROM TWO DEEP
THINKERS.
>> I HAVE BEEN THINKING ABOUT
THE POSSIBILITY OF A DEEPER
PHILOSOPHICAL CONVERSATION.
THANK YOU FOR THE ARTICLE, "THE
THREE DIMENSIONS OF
PHENOMENOLOGY", ONTOLOGICAL AND
TRANSCENDENTAL.
>> SOON, THEY WERE MEETING
REGULARLY AND WRITING TO EACH
OTHER OFTEN.
BUT THIS WAS THE 1970S, IN THE
DEEP CHILL OF THE COLD WAR
YEARS, AND COMMUNIST POLAND WAS
AN ATHEIST POLICE STATE.
IN OCTOBER 1974, A LITTLE OVER A
YEAR AFTER FIRST MEETING ANNA
TERESA TYMIENECKA, CARDINAL
WOJTYLA TRAVELLED TO ROME FOR A
BIG CONFERENCE OF BISHOPS, AND
HE TOOK A BUNDLE OF HER LETTERS
WITH HIM.
HE STAYED FOR MORE THAN A MONTH
AT THE POLISH COLLEGE WHERE
POLISH STUDENT PRIESTS NORMALLY
LODGE IN ROME.
HERE HE COULD ANSWER ANNA-
TERESA'S LETTERS SAFE FROM THE
PRYING EYES OF THE SECRET
POLICE.
AND, FOR THE FIRST TIME, HE
DROPPED HER ACADEMIC TITLES AND
ADDRESSED HER SIMPLY AS,
>> "DEAR TERESA ANNA, I WOULD
LIKE TO REPLY TO FOUR OF YOUR
LETTERS I RECEIVED IN JULY.
I DIDN'T POST THEM BEFORE AS I
DIDN'T TRUST THE POLISH POST
OFFICE."
>> EUGENE KIZLUK STUDIED THE
LETTERS IN PREPARATION FOR THE
SALE.
>> THIS IS VERY MUCH THE FIRST
INFORMAL LETTER THAT HE WROTE TO
HER.
>> I HAVE BROUGHT THEM WITH ME
TO ROME, AND I AM READING THEM
AGAIN.
THEY ARE SO MEANINGFUL AND
PERSONAL.
>> BY NOW KAROL WOJTYLA AND ANNA
TERESA TYEMIENECKA HAD A JOINT
PROJECT, AND ENGLISH LANGUAGE
VERSION OF THE BOOK THAT FIRST
INSPIRED HER TO GET IN TOUCH
WITH HIM.
IT WAS TO BE MORE THAN A
STRAIGHTFORWARD TRANSLATION.
SHE WANTED TO DEVELOP AND REFINE
HIS IDEAS.
AND THAT MEANT INTENSE
DISCUSSIONS DURING LONG HOURS
TOGETHER.
THEY WOULD MEET REGULARLY IN
ROME AND POLAND AND EVEN WHEN
THEY WERE SEEING EACH OTHER
EVERY DAY, THEY WOULD SOMETIMES
WRITE BEFORE AND AFTER THEIR
MEETINGS.
>> "I WAS VERY HAPPY TO SEE YOU
YESTERDAY.
I WOULD LIKE TO TALK TO YOU
TOMORROW.
I'M COMING BACK THIS AFTERNOON,
WE COULD CONTINUE OUR
CONVERSATION.
FATHER DZIWISZ WILL DELIVER THIS
LETTER.
IT IS GOOD THAT WE COULD TALK ON
THE PHONE BEFORE YOUR
DEPARTURE."
>> THEIR RELATIONSHIP WAS ON TWO
PLANES.
ONE WAS INTELLECTUAL, THE OTHER
ONE WAS PERSONAL AND VERY
EMOTIONAL.
THEY BECAME VERY CLOSE TO EACH
OTHER, ON BOTH LEVELS IN FACT.
THE TWO MIXED UP AND IT WAS ALSO
VERY DIFFICULT FOR THEM TO
SEPARATE THE TWO.
>> IN NEW YORK, I SOUGHT OUT THE
ONE JOURNALIST WHO HAD SOME
SENSE OF THE IMPORTANCE OF THE
RELATIONSHIP.
THE VETERAN REPORTER, CARL
BERNSTEIN, INTERVIEWED PROFESSOR
TYEMIENECKA WHEN HE WAS WRITING
HIS JOHN PAUL BIOGRAPHY.
AND SHE TOLD HIM ABOUT HER
CORRESPONDENCE WITH THE POPE.
>> RIGHT AWAY WHEN I WENT TO SEE
MADAM TYEMENISCKA AS SHE REFERS
TO HERSELF, IN POMFRET, SHE
IMMEDIATELY REFERRED TO THIS
CORRESPONDENCE AND IN FACT READ
ME ONE OF THE POPE'S LETTERS TO
HER AS A KIND OF WAY OF
BUTTRESSING HER CLAIM TO BEING
SO IMPORTANT IN HIS LIFE.
>> THAT WAS TWO DECADES AGO.
AND WHEN HE ASKED HER ABOUT HER
FEELINGS, SHE SWATTED THE
QUESTION AWAY.
I SAID TO HER, WERE YOU IN LOVE
WITH WOJTYLA?
AND SHE SAYS, NO I NEVER FELL IN
LOVE WITH THE CARDINAL.
HOW COULD I FALL WITH A MIDDLE-
AGED CLERGYMAN, I AM STILL
CONSIDERED A BEAUTIFUL WOMAN AND
I'M SURROUNDED BY YOUNG AND
HANDSOME MEN.
TO FALL IN LOVE WITH A
CLERGYMAN?
THERE COULD BE NO SUCCESS AT
ALL.
AND I SAID, NO ROMANTIC
FEELINGS?
SHE SAID, THIS QUESTION, IT
DOESN'T REALLY APPLY.
HOW CAN YOU ASK ME SUCH A SILLY
QUESTION?
>> FOR HER TO FALL IN LOVE WITH
HIM IS COMPLETELY UNDERSTANDABLE
TO ME.
HE WAS HANDSOME, HE WAS
POWERFUL, HE WAS ON A TRACK THAT
WAS EXTRAORDINARY.
HE WAS POLISH.
HOW COULD YOU NOT BE TAKEN WITH
THAT, ALL THAT CHARM IN ONE
PERSON?
>> THERE IS NOTHING IN KAROL
WOJTYLA'S LETTERS TO SUGGEST HE
BROKE HIS VOW OF CELIBACY, AND
EVERYTHING WE KNOW ABOUT THIS
IRON-WILLED MAN SUGGESTS HE
WOULD HAVE KEPT IT.
IN OCTOBER, THE PRINCES OF THE
CHURCH WERE BACK IN ROME FOR
ANOTHER CONCLAVE.
CHOOSING A NEW POPE FOR THE
SECOND TIME IN LESS THAN TWO
MONTHS.
ON THE THIRD DAY AT JUST AFTER
6:20 IN THE EVENING, THE WHITE
SMOKE ROSE FROM THE CHIMNEY IN
THE CORNER OF ST PETER'S SQUARE,
ANNOUNCING THE ELECTION OF THE
FIRST NON ITALIAN POPE FOR 455
YEARS.
IN THE PAPAL APARTMENTS, KAROL
WOJTYLA, NOW VICAR OF CHRIST AND
SUPREME PONTIFF OF THE UNIVERSAL
CHURCH, WROTE ALMOST IMMEDIATELY
TO ANNA TERESA TYEMIENECKA.
>> DEAR TERESA ANNA, I'M WRITING
AFTER THE EVENT.
I PROMISE I WILL REMEMBER
EVERYTHING AT THIS NEW STAGE OF
MY JOURNEY.
THE WHOLE THING IS WRITTEN TOO
DEEPLY INTO MY LIFE FOR ME TO DO
OTHERWISE.
>> ANYONE IN THE U.S. WHO OWNS A
DRONE IS NOW REQUIRED TO
REGISTER IT WITH THE FEDERAL
AVIATION ADMINISTRATION AT A
COST OF $5.
APPROXIMATE 25,000 DRONE OWNERS
DID SO BEFORE LAST FRIDAY'S
DEADLINE.
ANYONE CAUGHT WITH AN
UNREGISTERED DRONE FACES A FINE
UP TO $27,500.
ASIDE FROM RECREATIONAL USE,
DRONES ARE ALSO BEING USED BY
SCIENTISTS, EXPERIMENTING WITH
HOW TO BETTER PREDICT SEVERE
STORMS LIKE TORNADOES.
THAT IS A PRIORITY IN OKLAHOMA
WHERE MORE THAN 100 TORNADOES
TOUCHED DOWN LAST YEAR.
THE NEWSHOUR'S STEPHEN PHEE HAS
MORE.
>> Reporter: THEY MAY LOOK LIKE
TOYS, BUT THESE SMALL PLANES
FLYING HIGH ABOVE OKLAHOMA STATE
UNIVERSITY IN STILLWATER MAY ONE
DAY HELP WEATHER FORECASTERS
PREDICT STORMS AND SAVE LIVES.
OKLAHOMA STATE, ALONG WITH THREE
OTHER UNIVERSITIES, WON A
$6 MILLION NATIONAL SCIENCE
FOUNDATION GRANT TO DEVELOP
SMALL WEATHER-SENSING DRONES.
OVER THE PAST TWO YEARS, 24-
YEAR-OLD ALYSSA AVERY HAS
BEEN BUILDING HER OWN AIRCRAFT,
NAMED MARIA.
>> THE PROJECT IS BASICALLY
DESIGNING AN AIRCRAFT, A SMALL
ONE REMOTELY PILOTED, THAT CAN
FLY AROUND SEVERE STORMS AND
COLLECT AS MUCH DATA AS WE CAN
SO WE CAN LENGTHEN THAT WARNING
TIME AND MAKE IT MORE SAFE FOR
EVERYONE LIVING IN TORNADO
AREAS.
>> Reporter: AS AN ENGINEER, HER
JOB IS TO BUILD A PLANE STRONG
ENOUGH TO FLY CLOSE TO
DEVELOPING SUPERCELLS, THE MEGA
STORMS THAT OFTEN LEAD TO
TORNADOES IN OKLAHOMA.
AVERY'S AIRCRAFT IS DESIGNED TO
DEPLOY SENSORS THAT MONITOR
TEMPERATURE, WINDSPEED AND
ATMOSPHERIC PRESSURE.
WE CAN'T MEASURE THIS STUFF FROM
THE GROUND?
IT'S BETTER TO DO IT IN THE AIR?
>> YEAH, SO RIGHT NOW WE HAVE
RADAR, WHICH OBVIOUSLY EVERYONE
KNOWS ABOUT, SO IT SURVEYS AT A
HIGHER ALTITUDE.
IT DID IMPROVE WEATHER MODELS A
LOT BUT WHEN IT COMES TO THAT
REALLY PRECISE, LIKE, HOW CLOSE
IS IT GOING TO BE, WHERE IS IT
GOING TO BE, WHAT'S ACTUALLY
GOING TO TURN INTO A TORNADO
VERSUS JUST CIRCULATION WHICH IS
MUCH LESS DANGEROUS, THEY DON'T
HAVE THAT.
IT'S CALLED IN SITU, WHICH IS
RIGHT THERE THERMODYNAMIC DATA.
>> Reporter: IN OTHER WORDS,
FORECASTERS NEED TO GET CLOSER
TO THE ACTION, SCANNING PARTS OF
THE ATMOSPHERE THAT TRADITIONAL
RADAR, WEATHER BALLOONS AND
SOPHISTICATED WEATHER TOWERS
CAN'T REACH.
THAT SWEET SPOT IS CALLED THE
LOWER ATMOSPHERIC BOUNDARY
LAYER, A ZONE ROUGHLY 1,000 FEET
OFF THE GROUND.
PHILLIP CHILSON IS A PROFESSOR
OF METEOROLOGY AT THE UNIVERSITY
OF OKLAHOMA AND IS ALSO INVOLVED
IN THE PROJECT.
>> THERE HAS BEEN A NEED FOR
HIGH QUALITY MEASUREMENTS OF THE
LOWER ATMOSPHERE THAT'S BEEN
KNOWN BY THE METEOROLOGICAL
COMMUNITY FOR DECADES.
THE LOWEST LEVEL OF THE
ATMOSPHERE IS SO DYNAMIC
SPATIALLY AND TEMPORALLY, THAT
IT'S VERY UNDER-SAMPLED AT
PRESENT.
>> Reporter: SO TO GET MORE
INFORMATION ABOUT THAT PART OF
THE ATMOSPHERE, STUDENTS AT
OKLAHOMA STATE AREN'T JUST
BUILDING THE PLANES, THEY'RE
DESIGNING THE SENSORS AND
WRITING THE SOFTWARE THAT
PROCESSES THE DATA GATHERED IN
THE SKIES.
21-YEAR-OLD NICHOLAS FOSTER IS
DESIGNING A SMALL POD THAT
AIRCRAFT-LIKE MARIA MAY ONE DAY
CARRY INTO A STORM.
>> ESSENTIALLY IT'S JUST A
PACKET OF SENSORS.
SO WHAT I'M DOING IS THESE WILL
GO INSIDE OF MARIA, AND THESE
WILL BE THE THINGS THAT FALL OUT
AND PARACHUTE DOWN AND TAKE THE
DATA ON THE WAY DOWN.
>> Reporter: THE OKLAHOMA STATE
RESEARCHERS HOPE THIS TECHNOLOGY
CAN BE USED AT HOME AND AROUND
THE WORLD TO GIVE FORECASTERS
EARLIER WARNINGS OF SEVERE
WEATHER.
>> GETTING THIS DATA WILL ALLOW
THEM TO TAKE OUR FORECASTS WHICH
NOW FOR SEVERE STORMS AND
TORNADOES AT THE TEN TO FIFTEEN
MARK, MAYBE UP TO THE HOUR MARK
WHERE WE CAN ACTUALLY WARN ON
FORECAST AND SAY, HEY YOU KNOW
YOU'RE GOING TO HAVE SEVERE
WEATHER IN YOUR AREA THAT YOU'RE
GOING TO SEE SOMETHING LIKE A
TORNADO.
AND YOU KNOW THAT'S REALLY GOING
TO SAVE LIVES IN THE END.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SUNDAY.
>> Stewart: A MICHIGAN MAN WHO
ALLEGEDLY SHOT AND KILLED SIX
PEOPLE RANDOMLY LAST NIGHT IS
NOW IN POLICE CUSTODY.
45-YEAR-OLD JASON BRIAN DALTON
WAS ARRESTED THIS MORNING, AND
HE IS DUE TO BE ARRAIGNED
TOMORROW, MOST LIKELY ON MURDER
CHARGES.
THE MASS SHOOTING SPREE HAPPENED
IN THREE LOCATIONS IN KALAMAZOO
COUNTY DURING A FOUR HOUR SPAN.
POLICE ALLEGE THAT AFTER DALTON
SHOT AND WOUNDED A WOMAN IN AN
APARTMENT COMPLEX PARKING LOT,
HE THEN SHOT AND KILLED A MAN
AND HIS TEENAGE SON IN A CAR
DEALERSHIP, AND LATER, SHOT AND
KILLED FOUR MORE PEOPLE IN A
RESTAURANT PARKING LOT.
ONE OTHER PERSON, A 14-YEAR-OLD
GIRL, WAS SERIOUSLY WOUNDED.
POLICE SAY THEY FOUND A SEMI-
AUTOMATIC HANDGUN IN DALTON'S
VEHICLE, BUT DALTON HAD NO
CRIMINAL RECORD, AND THEY DO NOT
KNOW THE MOTIVE FOR THE ATTACKS.
SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN KERRY
SAYS A CEASE FIRE IN THE FIVE-
YEAR CIVIL WAR IN SYRIA IS
CLOSER THAN EVER BEFORE.
AFTER MEETINGS TODAY IN SYRIA'S
SOUTHERN NEIGHBOR, JORDAN, KERRY
SAID HE HAD STRUCK A"
PROVISIONAL AGREEMENT" WITH THE
FOREIGN MINISTER OF RUSSIA,
WHICH SUPPORTS EMBATTLED SYRIAN
PRESIDENT BASHAR AL-ASSAD.
KERRY SAID HE EXPECTS PRESIDENT
OBAMA AND RUSSIAN PRESIDENT
VLADMIR PUTIN TO SPEAK IN THE
NEXT FEW DAYS TO TRY TO FINALIZE
ENFORCEMENT DETAILS AND REACH
OUT TO OPPOSING SIDES IN THE
WAR.
AS FIGHTING CONTINUES, THE
ISLAMIC STATE GROUP CLAIMED
RESPONSIBILITY FOR CAR BOMBINGS
TODAY IN THE CITIES OF HOMS AND
DAMASCUS THAT KILLED MORE THAN
100 PEOPLE.
INDIA IS TRYING TO QUELL
PROTESTS THAT HAVE JEOPARDIZED
THE WATER SUPPLY IN THE CAPITAL
OF DELHI.
THE GOVERNMENT SENT TROOPS TODAY
TO NORTHERN HARYANA STATE, WHERE
MEMBERS OF A RURAL CASTE ARE
DEMANDING MORE BENEFITS.
THE PROTESTERS HAVE SABOTAGED
PUMPING EQUIPMENT THAT SUPPLIES
MOST OF THE WATER TO DELHI'S 16-
MILLION PEOPLE.
THE GOVERNMENT HAS IMPOSED WATER
RATIONING WHILE ENGINEERS TRY TO
REPAIR THE EQUIPMENT.
INDIAN SECURITY FORCES HAVE
KILLED AT LEAST 12 PEOPLE SINCE
PROTESTS TURNED VIOLENT ON
FRIDAY.
>> AND FINALLY, DREW HUNTER HAS
SET A NEW AMERICAN HIGH SCHOOL
RECORD FOR RUNNING THE MILE.
AT THE ANNUAL MILLER GAMES TRACK
MEET IN NEW YORK YESTERDAY,
HUNTER POSTED A TIME OF 3
MINUTES AND 57.8 SECONDS,
LOWERING HIS OWN PREVIOUS RECORD
FOR THE INDOOR MILE BY NEARLY
HALF A SECOND.
THE 18-YEAR-OLD VIRGINIA SENIOR
IS ONLY THE SEVENTH HIGH-SCHOOL
STUDENT TO RUN A SUB-FOUR-MINUTE
MILE INDOORS OR OUTDOORS SINCE
JIM RYAN DID IT FIRST IN 1964.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.
I'M ALISON STEWART.
GOOD NIGHT.